Docs/signoz istio metrics (#1370)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/docs/istio/istio-metrics.mdx

---
id: istio-metrics
title: Istio Metrics
sidebar_label: Istio Metrics
---

With SigNoz, you can collect and monitor Istio service mesh metrics.

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Tabs entityName="plans">
```

Needed for SaaS onboarding.

  <TabItem value="cloud" label="SigNoz Cloud" default>

## Prerequisites

- A running Istio service mesh (v1.14+ recommended)

> - Access to a SigNoz Cloud tenant and your SigNoz ingestion key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Removing this as we are already inside the SigNoz Cloud tab.

> - kubectl and istioctl installed and configured

Reviewer: Is there any version requirement for this ?
For example kubectl ≥ 1.29, istioctl ≥ 1.2

> - Istio control-plane namespace: `istio-system` (used throughout this guide)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Istio control-plane namespace: `istio-system` (used throughout this document)
```

What if the user is not using this default namespace? We should keep this namespace as a placeholder and tell the user that if they are using the default settings, their namespace will be `istio-system`.

## 1. Deploy OpenTelemetry Collector with Helm

The OpenTelemetry Collector is responsible for collecting telemetry data from Istio and forwarding it to SigNoz. We'll use the official OpenTelemetry Helm chart for deployment.

1. Add the OpenTelemetry Helm repository:

   ```bash

>    helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts

Reviewer: Why not use the SigNoz helm chart ?
https://signoz.io/docs/tutorial/kubernetes-infra-metrics/

   helm repo update
   ```

2. Create a `values.yaml` file for the Collector configuration:

   ```yaml
   # values.yaml
   mode: "deployment"
   namespaceOverride: "istio-system"

   # Create service account with proper permissions
   serviceAccount:
     create: true
     name: "otel-collector"

   # Create cluster role with necessary permissions for Kubernetes service discovery
   clusterRole:
     create: true
     name: "otel-collector"
     rules:
       - apiGroups:
           - ""
         resources:
           - "pods"
           - "namespaces"
           - "nodes"
           - "endpoints"
           - "services"
         verbs:
           - "get"
           - "list"
           - "watch"
     clusterRoleBinding:
       name: "otel-collector"

   image:
     repository: "otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib"

>      tag: "latest"

Reviewer: Will it always work for the latest? Or should there be a specific version number ?

   config:
     receivers:
       # Prometheus receiver for Istio metrics
       prometheus:
         config:
           scrape_configs:
             # Collect metrics from Istio proxies
             - job_name: istio-metrics
               kubernetes_sd_configs:
                 - role: pod
                   namespaces:

>                      names: [default]    # Update with your application namespaces

Reviewer: Let's put a placeholder here `<your-appication-namespace>`

                   selectors:
                     - role: pod

>                        label: istio-injection=enabled

Reviewer: This label was deprecated. Is it backwards compatible?

                   replacement: $1:15090
                   target_label: __address__
             # Collect metrics from Istio ingress gateway
             - job_name: istio-ingressgateway
               kubernetes_sd_configs:
                 - role: endpoints
                   namespaces:
                     names: [istio-system]
               metrics_path: /stats/prometheus
               scheme: http
               scrape_interval: 15s
               relabel_configs:
                 - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_service_name]
                   regex: istio-ingressgateway
                   action: keep
                 - source_labels: [__address__]
                   action: replace
                   regex: ([^:]+)(?::\d+)?
                   replacement: $1:15090
                   target_label: __address__
       
       otlp:
         protocols:
           grpc: {}
           http: {}
           
       httpcheck:
         targets:
           - endpoint: "<YOUR_PRODUCT_ENDPOINT>"
             method: GET
         collection_interval: 10s

     processors:
       batch: {}

     exporters:
       debug:
         verbosity: detailed 
       otlp/signoz:

>          endpoint: "ingest.in.signoz.cloud:443"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         endpoint: "ingest.<region>.signoz.cloud:443"
```

Always keep this placeholder for the SigNoz cloud region.

         tls:
           insecure: false
         headers:

>            "signoz-ingestion-key": "<YOUR_SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           "signoz-ingestion-key": "<your-ingestion-key>"
```

     extensions:
       health_check:
         endpoint: "0.0.0.0:13133"

     service:
       extensions: ["health_check"]
       pipelines:
         metrics:
           receivers: [otlp, httpcheck, prometheus]
           processors: [batch]
           exporters: [debug, otlp/signoz]
         traces:
           receivers: [otlp]
           processors: [batch]
           exporters: [otlp/signoz]

   # Disable default pipelines
   presets:
     logsCollection:
       enabled: false
     hostMetrics:
       enabled: false
     kubernetesAttributes:
       enabled: false
     kubeletMetrics:
       enabled: false
     kubernetesEvents:
       enabled: false
     clusterMetrics:
       enabled: false

   service:
     type: ClusterIP

   fullnameOverride: "otel-collector"

   extraEnvs:
     - name: LOG_LEVEL
       value: "debug"
   ```

>    > **Note:** Replace `<YOUR_SIGNOZ_INGESTION_KEY>` with your actual SigNoz ingestion key. Use the appropriate regional endpoint for your SigNoz Cloud instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   >

>    > | Region | Endpoint                     |

Reviewer: Remove this table.

>    > |--------|------------------------------|

Reviewer: add this 

- Set the `<region>` to match your SigNoz Cloud [region](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/overview/#endpoint)
- Replace `<your-ingestion-key>` with your SigNoz [ingestion key](https://signoz.io/docs/ingestion/signoz-cloud/keys/)

   > | US     | `ingest.us.signoz.cloud:443` |
   > | IN     | `ingest.in.signoz.cloud:443` |
   > | EU     | `ingest.eu.signoz.cloud:443` |
   >

>    > Also update the `namespaces` in the Prometheus configuration to match your application namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Replace <your-application-namespace> with the namespace of your application.
```

3. Install the OpenTelemetry Collector using Helm:

   ```bash
   helm install otel-collector open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector \
     --namespace istio-system \
     -f values.yaml
   ```

4. Verify the Collector deployment:

   ```bash
   kubectl get pods -n istio-system -l app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector
   ```

   You should see the collector pod running:

>    ```

Reviewer: This should be a screenshot instead of a codeblock since we don't want the user to copy this.

   NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   otel-collector-8f7b86d8c-z9xpj   1/1     Running   0          2m
   ```

## 2. Configure Istio for Metrics Collection

> Now we need to configure Istio to send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to configure Istio to send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

### Update Istio MeshConfig

Configure Istio to emit telemetry data by updating the MeshConfig:

```bash
istioctl install -y \

>   --set values.meshConfig.enablePrometheusMerge=true \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --set values.meshConfig.enablePrometheusMerge=true \
```

Please check if `enablePrometheusMerge` is available in the latest version. More specifically from 1.21

  --set 'values.meshConfig.defaultConfig.telemetry.providers[0].name=otlp' \
  --set 'values.meshConfig.defaultConfig.telemetry.providers[0].provider=opentelemetry' \
  --set 'values.meshConfig.defaultConfig.telemetry.providers[0].opentelemetry.address=otel-collector.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:4317' \
  --set values.meshConfig.defaultConfig.tracing.sampling=100 \

>   --set values.meshConfig.defaultConfig.tracing.zipkin.address=otel-collector.istio-system.svc.cluster.local:9411

Reviewer: Why are we using Zipkin? Why not otlp ? Also, I don't see Zipkin in the deployment file.

```

This configuration:
- Enables Prometheus metrics collection
- Configures OpenTelemetry as a telemetry provider
- Points Istio to the OpenTelemetry Collector endpoint
- Sets up tracing with the Zipkin protocol (which OpenTelemetry Collector can receive)

> - Sets a 100% sampling rate for traces (adjust for production environments)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sets a 100% sampling rate for traces which can be adjusted according to your needs.
```

### Apply Telemetry Resource for Metrics

Create an Istio Telemetry resource to control which metrics are collected:

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: signoz-metrics
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  metrics:
    - providers:
        - name: prometheus
      overrides:
        - match:
            metric: ALL_METRICS
          disabled: true
        - match:
            metric: REQUEST_COUNT
          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: REQUEST_DURATION
          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: REQUEST_SIZE
          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: RESPONSE_SIZE
          disabled: false
EOF
```

## 3. Validating Metrics in SigNoz

Once your configuration is applied, you should be able to see Istio metrics in SigNoz.

> 1. Log into your SigNoz Cloud account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 2. Navigate to **Metrics Explorer**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to **Metrics Explorer**
```

> 3. Look for metrics with the `istio` prefix, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Look for metrics with the `istio` prefix, such as:
```

   - `istio_requests_total`
   - `istio_request_duration_milliseconds`
   - `istio_request_bytes`
   - `istio_response_bytes`
   
   You should also see HTTP check metrics from the `httpcheck` receiver:
   - `httpcheck_status` - Indicates if the HTTP endpoint is reachable (value of 1 for success)
   - `httpcheck_duration` - Shows the response time of the HTTP endpoint in milliseconds

> **Note**: If you don't see Istio metrics immediately, but HTTP check metrics are visible, ensure you're generating traffic to your Istio services. Unlike HTTP checks that actively probe endpoints, Istio metrics only appear when there's actual traffic flowing through the mesh.

> ![Istio Metrics in SigNoz](/img/blog/common/istio-metrics-explorer.png)Figure 1 - Metrics Explorer

Reviewer: Use this format for images.

```
<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
<img className="box-shadowed-image" src="/img/docs/frontend-monitoring/document-load-services-section-image.webp" alt="SigNoz Services Interface"/>
<figcaption><i>SigNoz Services Interface</i></figcaption>
</figure>
```

Also, we use `.webp` images so please convert the `.png` to `.webp`

And let's put the images inside the docs folder rather that the blog folder. 
`/img/docs/istio/..... .webp

## 4. Performance Considerations and Tuning

When collecting metrics from Istio, there are some performance considerations to keep in mind:

### Batch Processor Tuning

The `batch` processor can be tuned to optimize for your specific environment:

```yaml
processors:
  batch:
    # Increase the batch size to reduce the number of export requests
    send_batch_size: 1000
    # Increase the timeout to allow for larger batches (in milliseconds)
    timeout: 10000
    # Adjust the maximum queue size based on your memory constraints
    send_batch_max_size: 2000
```

### Metric Filtering

If you're experiencing high cardinality or excessive metric volume, you can add filters to reduce the data sent to SigNoz:

```yaml
processors:
  filter:
    metrics:
      include:
        match_type: regexp
        metric_names:
          - istio_request.*
          - istio_response.*

> ```

Reviewer: Explain in 1 line what will this code block do.

### Resource Allocation

For production environments with high traffic, consider increasing the resources allocated to the collector:

```yaml
resources:
  limits:
    cpu: 1
    memory: 2Gi
  requests:
    cpu: 200m
    memory: 400Mi

> ```

Reviewer: Explain in 1 line what will this code block do.

> ## 5. Troubleshooting

Reviewer: Since the troubleshooting section is same for both cloud and self-host, let's keep it outside of tabs and avoid duplication.

If there is some troubleshooting instruction that is different for SigNoz Cloud and Self-Hosted then put that under Tabs by creating new tabs.

for i in {1..100}; do
  curl -s http://$(kubectl get svc istio-ingressgateway -n istio-system -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}') > /dev/null
  sleep 1
done
```

### Verify Istio Configuration

Make sure Istio is configured to send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector:

```bash
istioctl proxy-config bootstrap $POD_NAME.default | grep -A 10 opentelemetry
```

### Common Issues and Solutions

1. **Permissions Issues**: 
   - Make sure the OpenTelemetry Collector service account has the necessary permissions
   - Create proper ClusterRole and ClusterRoleBinding for the collector

2. **Configuration Issues**:
   - Check that the Prometheus receiver is correctly configured
   - Verify that the service and port for the OpenTelemetry Collector are correct
   - Make sure the pipeline includes the Prometheus receiver

3. **Network Issues**:
   - Verify that pods can communicate with each other
   - Check that there are no network policies blocking traffic

4. **Missing Telemetry Provider**:
   - Ensure you've configured Istio to use OpenTelemetry as a telemetry provider
   - Check that the address for the OpenTelemetry provider points to your collector

>   </TabItem>

Reviewer: All the comments for the Cloud Section which apply to Self-Host section should be implemented.

Also, the steps which are common for Self-Hosted and Cloud should be moved out of the tabs components to avoid duplicating the content so that the mdx file becomes easier to use.

>   <TabItem value="self-hosted" label="SigNoz Self-Hosted">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <TabItem value="self-host" label="Self-Host">
```

These are needed for the Self-Host tab to not show up in the Cloud onboarding.

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer: Move the Pre-requisite section outside of the Tabs since it will be same for both Cloud and Self-Host SigNoz after removing the installation pointer from both.

Author: It's not entirely same though

- A running Istio service mesh (v1.14+ recommended)

> - A self-hosted SigNoz installation (with OTLP port 4317 accessible)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

           exporters: [otlp]

   # Disable default pipelines
   presets:
     logsCollection:
       enabled: false
     hostMetrics:
       enabled: false
     kubernetesAttributes:
       enabled: false
     kubeletMetrics:
       enabled: false
     kubernetesEvents:
       enabled: false
     clusterMetrics:
       enabled: false

   service:
     type: ClusterIP

   fullnameOverride: "otel-collector"

   extraEnvs:
     - name: LOG_LEVEL
       value: "debug"
   ```

   > **Note:** This configuration assumes SigNoz is installed in the `signoz` namespace with the OTel Collector service named `signoz-otel-collector`. Update the endpoint as needed for your installation.
   >
   > Also update the `namespaces` in the Prometheus configuration to match your application namespaces.

3. Install the OpenTelemetry Collector using Helm:

   ```bash
   helm install otel-collector open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector \
     --namespace istio-system \
     -f values.yaml
   ```

4. Verify the Collector deployment:

   ```bash
   kubectl get pods -n istio-system -l app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-collector
   ```

## 2. Configure Istio for Metrics Collection

> Now we need to configure Istio to send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to configure Istio to send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: REQUEST_DURATION
          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: REQUEST_SIZE
          disabled: false
        - match:
            metric: RESPONSE_SIZE
          disabled: false
EOF
```

## 3. Validating Metrics in SigNoz

Once your configuration is applied, you should be able to see Istio metrics in SigNoz.

1. Log into your self-hosted SigNoz instance
2. Navigate to **Metrics Explorer**
3. Look for metrics with the `istio` prefix, such as:
   - `istio_requests_total`
   - `istio_request_duration_milliseconds`
   - `istio_request_bytes`
   - `istio_response_bytes`
   
   You should also see HTTP check metrics from the `httpcheck` receiver:
   - `httpcheck_status` - Indicates if the HTTP endpoint is reachable (value of 1 for success)
   - `httpcheck_duration` - Shows the response time of the HTTP endpoint in milliseconds

> **Note**: If you don't see Istio metrics immediately, but HTTP check metrics are visible, ensure you're generating traffic to your Istio services. Unlike HTTP checks that actively probe endpoints, Istio metrics only appear when there's actual traffic flowing through the mesh.

> ![Istio Metrics in SigNoz](/img/blog/common/istio-metrics-self-hosted.png)Figure 1 - Metrics Explorer

Reviewer: `istio-metrics-self-hosted.png`

There is no image with this name.
